## So What Does the GDPR Require?

In a nutshell, the GDPR establishes rules for how companies, governments, and other entities can process the personal data of data subjects who are in the EU. Many of these rules already existed under previous EU law, but some rules are now stricter, some are less burdensome, and some are brand new. The rules reach beyond the physical borders of the EU and apply to any organization, regardless of whether it has a physical presence in the EU, if it offers goods or services to people in the EU, or if it tracks the behavior of those people (including through the use of cookies).

**Basis of data processing:** In order to process personal data, organizations must have a lawful basis to process the data, such as to fulfill the performance of an agreement with the data subject or by obtaining the consent of a data subject. To the extent that consent is the only lawful basis, that consent must be freely given, specific, informed, and unambiguous. In other words, organizations must give data subjects a genuine choice whether to allow their data to be processed and must agree via a clear statement or affirmative action. Requiring data subjects to grant broad consent to processing of their personal data when they register to use a service may not constitute freely given consent beyond processing that is necessary for providing the service. Additionally, organizations must be able to prove that they have obtained valid consent.

**Compliance obligations:** Previous EU law directly regulated primarily data controllers; however, the GDPR places numerous direct compliance obligations on data processors. This includes requirements that processors only process data in accordance with the controller’s instructions, not share data with other vendors without the consent of the controller, and implement appropriate security measures (which we discuss further in the next unit). Additionally, the law imposes several more compliance obligations on both data controllers and data processors to implement appropriate policies, assess the privacy impact of changes to business practices, and keep detailed records on data activities.

**Breach notification:** Data controllers must report any data breach to their data protection authority as soon as possible and no later than 72 hours after becoming aware of the breach, unless the breach is unlikely to result in any harm to the data subjects. If there is a high risk of harm, data controllers must report data breaches to the data subjects as soon as possible. Data processors must also notify data controllers of data breaches as soon as possible.   

**Data protection officer:** Any organization that regularly processes sensitive personal data on a large scale or is involved in regular and systematic monitoring of data subjects must appoint a data protection officer to ensure the organization complies with privacy law.

**Enforcement:** Under previous EU law, data protection authorities in Europe had limited ability to punish companies that violated privacy law. Under the GDPR, authorities can fine companies up to the greater of €20 million or 4% of a company’s annual global revenue, based on the seriousness of the breach and damages incurred.

**Use of processors:** Data controllers must have written agreements with data processors that ensure processors act only in accordance with the controller’s instructions, implement appropriate security measures to protect the data, assist the controller with its compliance obligations, return or destroy personal data at the end of the relationship, and comply with the provisions of GDPR applicable to processors.

**Profiling:** The GDPR places certain restrictions on the automated processing of personal data to evaluate a data subject—or, “profiling.” This includes monitoring or tracking data subjects to analyze or predict work performance, economic situation, health, behavior, preferences, or attitudes. Automated processes that can result in a significant impact on an individual, such as denial of a job or credit application, are considered high risk and are permitted only in limited cases.